Document database object collections (#539)
WoltLab/woltlab.github.io: docs/php/database-objects.md

) }}

## DatabaseObjectCollection

A Database Object Collection is a container for a group of `DatabaseObject` instances that optimizes how additional runtime data is loaded and shared between objects.

### Motivation

> Some database objects require extra runtime data (e.g., a UserProfile or file attachments).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some database objects require extra runtime data, for example, a `UserProfile` or file attachments.
```

Loading this data on demand per object is inefficient, as it requires repeated queries for each object.

> Earlier approaches (e.g., the Viewable* classes) tried to address this by preloading extra data:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Earlier approaches like the `Viewable*` classes tried to address this by preloading extra data:
```

- ✅ Efficient in some cases, especially when JOINs are used.
- ❌ Can be wasteful if not all of the extra data is needed.
- ❌ JOIN-based solutions lack reliable type hints, sometimes resulting in missing or inconsistent data.
- ❌ Introduces additional wrapper classes, complicating inheritance and interface checks.

### Concept

A Database Object Collection solves these issues by grouping objects and handling extra data more intelligently:

- Objects are fetched together as a collection.
- Extra data is not loaded upfront, but on first access.
- When extra data is requested for one object, it is fetched for all objects in the collection at once.

> - This balances efficiency with flexibility—data is only loaded when needed, but subsequent lookups are inexpensive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- This balances efficiency with flexibility — data is only loaded when needed, but subsequent lookups are inexpensive.
```

This leads to the following benefits:

- Lazy loading: Extra data is only fetched when required.
- Batch efficiency: Once requested, data for all objects in the collection is retrieved together.
- Type safety: Avoids unreliable JOIN-based type ambiguities.
- Cleaner design: Eliminates the need for complicated wrapper classes like Viewable*.

### Usage Example

A database object that is to be part of a collection should extend `CollectionDatabaseObject`.
`CollectionDatabaseObject` takes care of instantiating the collection.
Database objects that have been read together via a database object list are automatically combined into a shared collection.

```php
class FooObject extends CollectionDatabaseObject {
    public function getUserProfile(): UserProfile
    {
        return $this->getCollection()->getUserProfile($this);
    }
}
```

> When instantiating the collection, `CollectionDatabaseObject` searches by default for a class that matches the class name of the database object and contains the suffix `Collection.`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When instantiating the collection, `CollectionDatabaseObject` attempts to find a class with the same name but with the added suffix `Collection`.
```
